- Now let us talk about the servlet life cycle.
All the servlet classes that we have created
so far: login, servlet, and any other
that you may see in your project,
all of them have extended HttpServlet
and have either overridden the doGet or the doPost method
so that actions are taken accordingly.
And whenever we hit the request from the client,
the control automatically came inside
one of the doGet or the doPost methods.
But in Java, whenever you want to invoke a method
of any class, you need an object of that class
and then a reference variable to call that method.
But we have never instantiated any of our Servlet classes
nor did we call any of these methods ourselves.
So what is this entire thing that goes behind the scenes
where this is getting worked out automatically?
That is exactly what we need to understand
as a part of the servlet life cycle.
The servlet life cycle firstly is entirely managed
by the server container.
In our case it is TomCat, or it could be any other
JEE-compliant container source.
So, with software as for your project.
The life cycle of a servlet will start off
when the first request comes in for that servlet.
And it will end when the application is either undeployed
or maybe the server is shut down.
Now we need to take a look at the servlet life cycle
in two phases.
The first phase is when the first request
comes in to the servlet.
And the second phase is when repeated requests come
for the same servlet.
So let's go ahead and look at the first request scenario.
Now we know that every servlet is identified by a URL title.
So let's say you either hit the URL title
through the address bar or you hit the URL title
via your form element.
When the first request comes to any particular servlet,
the container is going to scan that web XML file
and find the appropriate servlet class as per URL pattern.
Of course, if you have chosen the annotation
way of configuration, it'll scan the class accordingly.
Once it finds that class, it's going to load and instantiate
that servlet class, based on the conventional
class loader information that is has.
So there's a ClassLoader API in core Java
which it uses in order to load any instantiate that servlet.
Now a very important thing to note here is,
that whenever you have n number of requests
coming to the same servlet, there is only one instance
of a servlet that gets created.
No matter if there are millions of requests
coming from millions of users for the same servlet.
But all those requests will have only one servlet object.
Once the instance of the servlet is created,
there's a lot of initialization activity
that happens after that.
The first one is that servlet context
and the servlet context objects
will get created.
We've already seen this as a part of our previous videos.
So they get created here and they attached to this servlet.
Up next, the next step is, it allocated a new thread
to the request.
Now this is important again.
You may have your application being accessed
by multiple users at exactly the same point in time.
This entire set of concurrent requests
is going to be handled by the multithreading capability
of Java platform.
So every request is going to be allocated a new thread,
and hence, those threads are going to run in parallel.
So that's exactly what happens at this stage.
The incoming request is going to get allocated a new thread.
Once this is done, it also allocates
a pair of HTTPServletRequest
and HTTPServletResponse objects
and attaches it to this incoming request.
Once done, then it is going to call a series of APIs.
It calls to the init method, the service method,
and the destroy method.
Now there's a very big doubt in the mind that may come
because, where are these methods coming from?
We have never written out any of these methods
in any of our servlet classes.
Right, so let's understand that bit.
The service method comes from the HTTPServlet class.
And the init and destroy methods
come from the GenericServlet class.
Let's recall the hierarchy quickly.
This is how the hierarchy is:
There's a Servlet interface at the top
then there's a GenericServlet, which is the abstract class,
the protocol-independent class,
and then you have the HTTPServlet class,
which is specifically designed for HTTP applications.
So the service method comes from the HTTPServlet
and the init and destroy come from the GenericServlet.
Of course they're going to be borrowed down
to HTTPServlet out of inheritance.
So when the init method is called, what exactly happens?
Init method is the place to accommodate any kind
of initialization activity for your servlet.
Let's say your servlet wants to interact with the database.
So you can set up the database connection
inside the init method.
Or let's say your servlet wants
to display the weather information all the time
so you can connect to that weather service
inside the init method.
Any kind of one time job; that happens in init method.
Because init method is going to get executed
only once during the entire life cycle of the servlet.
Up next, it calls the service method.
Now the service method, of course as I said,
comes from HTTPServlet and it is already implemented there.
The logic that goes inside the service method is:
depending on the kind of request that was made
from the client, let's say it's a GET or a POST
or anything like that,
the service method is accordingly going to delegate the call
to either the doGet or the doPost methods.
And this is the place exactly where your request
is being served for the user.
Now, once your application is about to get undeployed,
or maybe say your server is absolutely shutting down
altogether, that's the point when the destroy method
of the servlet is called.
Destroy method is going to hold any kind
of clean up activity that you want to do for the servlet.
So, maybe you have some object created
inside the init method where you can clean them up
in destroy method so that they're eligible
for the garbage collection process.
So this is how the life cycle looks like
for the first request.
Now, the second phase, where there are multiple requests
coming in for the same servlet,
do you see some points highlighted in red in this slide?
Those are the steps that happen again for repeated requests.
The instance is only one.
That does not happen again.
Directly, a new thread will be allocated to that request,
a new pair of HTTPServlet request and response objects
will be created and attached with the request,
and then, directly, the service method is called.
Again, depending on what request was made,
the service will go over and call
either the doGet or doPost, so on and so forth.
Like init, destroy is also called only once
during the life cycle.
So they will never happen again and again.
So this is how the life cycle looks like overall.
So if you summarize the methods of the servlet life cycle,
there are three life cycle methods:
init, service, and destroy, out of which init and destroy
can definitely be overridden by the developer.
Service method, however, there's no logical reason
to override it.
It has already been implemented in the HTTPServlet class
and if you choose to override service,
it means you take up the responsibility
of delegating the chores to the respective
doGet or doPost methods.
A very crucial point is, all the servlet requests
that are going to come in the application are multithreaded.
We've already spoken about the multithreading
capability of servlets.
For every new request, you have a new thread.
Now those threads are definitely going to run in parallel
for the concurrent requests.
It essentially means that care needs to be taken
to synchronize access to the shared resources.
Let's say your servlet class has instance variables
in the form of data, and if you have multiple threads
accessing that same data, at the same point in time,
there's definitely bound to be data inconsistency issues.
In order to avoid that, we will have to synchronize
that block of code which is trying
to have those multiple threads access the shared resource.
In the next video, we are going to look at this life cycle
by actually coding out the init and destroy methods
inside one of our servlet classes.